TESTed (#124)
dodona-edu/dodona-edu.github.io: en/references/tested-judge/dsl/README.md

        roundTo: 10
```

### Description

#### namespace
Default will TESTed use `submission` as namespace for an exercise.
For Java this must also be the name of the class.
When you, as teacher, expect that students must write a class, you would like to define the namespace yourself.
So you can set the namespace for this purpose.
When you set the namespace, you best use `snake_case` so that foreach programming language the correct conventions.

#### disable_optimizations
TESTed will use some default optimization techniques to optimize the execution time.
However, these optimization techniques could cause the optimized code to lead to unwanted results.
Therefore can the user disable these optimizations for the entire testplan, must this be necessary.

#### tabs
When jou wanted to give `namespace`, `disable_optimizations` or global configuration, you must use the keyword `tabs` the pass the list of tabs.

#### Textual types
The second testcase in the testplan for __How smart are you?__, illustrate that not only strings could be used for standard input, output or error.
In this case it where integers, but also logical values and rational numbers are supported.

::: warning Remark

> To avoid problems, we recommended to use strings for standard input, output and error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid problems, we recommend to use strings for standard input, output and error.
```

This is caused by the fact that the textual types will be converted to strings.
For more information about the translation of textual types, see paragraph [Known traps](#known-traps).
:::

#### Configuration
There are multiple configuration options to pass to the evaluator for standard output and error.
These options are:

- **ignoreWhitespace**:
  Ignore whitespace in prefix and suffix of the text by comparing the output.
- **caseInsensitive**:

>   Compare the output case insensitive.
>   So without making a distinction between uppercase and lowercase letters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ignore the difference between uppercase and lowercase when comparing the output.
```

- **tryFloatingPoint**:
  Try to compare the output as floats.
- **applyRounding**:
  Apply rounding when comparing the output as floats.
- **roundTo**:
  The number of decimals after the point, that you want to keep after rounding.
  This is mandatory when you want to apply rounding.
  

> You can pass the configuration options at the global level, foreach tab, context and/or specific for each output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can pass the configuration options at the global level, for each tab, context and/or specific for each output.
```

The configuration options must be accumulated, the option at to must specific level will be kept.

- **Global**:

>   Globally the options must be passed foreach output stream, in the object by the optional key `config`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Globally the options must be passed for each output stream, in the object by the optional key `config`.
```

>   This object has two keys `stdout` (options for standard output) and `stderr` (options for standarderror), whereby at least on key must be passed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This object has two keys `stdout` (options for standard output) and `stderr` (options for standarderror), where at least on key must be passed.
```

The testplan that we will examine is for the exercise [Rail fence cipher](https://dodona.ugent.be/en/courses/392/series/3922/activities/444829407/).

```yaml
- tab: "Encode"
  contexts:
  - expression: 'encode("And now for something completely different.", 4)'
    return: "Awsimlf.no  ohnopeyfetdnfrmtgclt irn oe ede"
  - expression: 'encode("Yesterday is history, tomorrow is a mystery, today is a gift of God, which is why we call it the present.", 1)'
    return-raw: '"Yesterday is history, tomorrow is a mystery, today is a gift of God, which is why we call it the present."'
- tab: "Decode"
  contexts:
  - expression: 'decode("Awsimlf.no  ohnopeyfetdnfrmtgclt irn oe ede", 4)'
    return: "And now for something completely different."
  - expression: 'decode("Yesterday is history, tomorrow is a mystery, today is a gift of God, which is why we call it the present.", 1)'
    return: "Yesterday is history, tomorrow is a mystery, today is a gift of God, which is why we call it the present."
```

![Rail fence cipher Encode](./spoorhekcodering_encode.png)
![Rail fence cipher Decode](./spoorhekcodering_decode.png)

### Description

#### Expression

> By function call tests is the input a statement or expresssion (both can use one of the following keywords: `expression` or `statement`) in a testcase for a context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With function call tests, the input is a statement or expression (both can use one of the following keywords: `expression` or `statement`) in a testcase for a context.
```

::: tip Hint

> Statements and expressions are discussed in detail in paragraph [Statements, expressions and return-raw](#statements-expressions-and-return-raw).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Statements and expressions are discussed in detail in section [Statements, expressions and return-raw](#statements-expressions-and-return-raw).
```

:::

#### Return values
There are two ways to pass the expected return value of the expression in the DSL.
Either you use the `return` or you use` return-raw`.

- **return**:
  The expected value of the expression is noted using YAML objects.
  The YAML data types will be translated to the basic data types of TESTed.
- **return-raw**:
  The expected value of the expression is noted using the same grammar as for statements and expressions (see section [Statements, expressions and return-raw](#statements-expressions-and-return-raw)).

::: warning Remark
When you want to test a function that has no return value (not the value `null`, `void` in Java by example),
you may not specify `return` or` return-raw`.
:::
  
## Variable assignments

> We will now look at a test plan where we also assign values to a variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will now look at a testplan where we also assign values to a variable.
```

For this we use the example exercise [Objects](https://github.com/dodona-edu/universal-judge/tree/master/exercise/objects) from TESTed.

```yaml
namespace: "equal_checker"
tabs:
- tab: "Feedback"
  contexts:
  - testcases:
    - statement: 'instance = new EqualChecker(5)'
    - expression: 'instance.check(25)'
      return: false
    - expression: 'instance.check(5)'
      return: true
```

![Objects](./equal_checker.png)

### Description
In a context can we define multiple testcase, that can depends on another.

> In this example we first create an object, after which we will call functions on these objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example we first create an object, after which we will call functions on this object.
```

> This is the most important reason to make a difference between contexts and testcases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the most important reason to differentiate between contexts and testcases.
```

> The contexts could be executed independent, while testcase in a context could be dependent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The contexts could be executed independently, while testcases in a context could be dependent.
```

#### Testcases
To use multiple testcases in a context, you must use the keyword `testcases`.

> This is a list of sequential dependent testcases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a list of sequential testcases: you may depend on the order of the testcases.
```

> If you want to evaluate one/more function call test(s) in addition to the code itself (or `main` method), you must also use the list of testcases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to evaluate one or more function call test(s) in addition to the code itself (or `main` method), you must also use the list of testcases.
```

> ## Fault messages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Error messages
```

> A concept often used in programming languages are errors that can be thrown up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A concept often used in programming languages are errors that can be raised.
```

> Our testplans can expect error messages, not to be confused with error types (which are programming language dependent).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify the expected error messages in testplans, not to be confused with error types (which are programming language dependent).
```

For this we are looking at a testplan for the "division" function.

```yaml
- tab: "Division"
  contexts:
  - statement: 'division(9, 0)'
    exception: "Division by zero"
```

### Description

#### exception
This keyword expects the expected fault message (as textual type) for a testcase.

## File linking

> In some programming exercises are the students expected to read input from files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some programming exercises the students are expected to read input from files.
```

In the evaluation feedback you often want to allow the student to see the content of these files.

> Hereby can you add list of files that must be linked at the context and/or testcase level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can add a list of files that must be linked at the context and/or testcase level.
```

```yaml
- tab: "Count"
  contexts:
  - statement: 'count_valid_passports("passports01.txt")'
    return: 2
    files:
    - name: "passports01.txt"
      url: "media/workdir/passports01.txt"
```

![File linking](./link_files.png)

### Description

#### files
At the level of a context and/or testcase you could be a list of the files to be linked.

#### name
Name of the file.

#### url
The relative path to the file that is located in the description folder of the exercise.

## Hidden tabs

> Dodona support to hide tabs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dodona supports hiding tabs.
```

However, it is visible when this tab contains errors.
For this you can give the option `hidden` to a tab that expects a Boolean value.

```yaml
- tab: "Hidden"
  hidden: true
  contexts:
  - stdin: "zero"
    stdout: "0\n"
- tab: "Visible"
  hidden: false
  contexts:
  - stdin: "one"
    stdout: "1\n"
```

![Fault in hidden tab](./hidden.png)

## Combination of function calls and input-output

> We have already seen testplans for either input-output or function calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have already seen testplans for both input-output or function calls.
```

We will now combine these concepts in one testplan.

> We will use a basic calculator example for this testplan.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will use the basic calculator example for this testplan.
```

| int32    | Datatype 32 bit integers |
| uint64   | Datatype 64 bit natural numbers |
| int64    | Datatype 64 bit integers |
| bigint   | Datatype larger integers (>64 bit) |
| rational | Default datatype rational numbers |
| single   | Datatype 32-bit floating point numbers |
| double   | Datatype 64-bit floating point numbers |
| extended | Datatype high precision floating points numbers |
| fixed    | Datatype rational numbers fixed precision |
| sequence | Default datatype sequences |
| list     | Datatype lists (sequence, dynamic length) |
| array    | Datatype arrays (sequence, fixed length) |
| tuple    | Datatype tuples |
| set      | Datatype sets |
| map      | Datatype dictionaires |

### Values
The grammar supports numbers, booleans, null-values and strings.

#### Numbers
Both integers and rational numbers are supported.
Integers always use a decimal format (ex: `2020`,` + 5`, `−2`).
Rational numbers can use either decimal (ex: `2.5`) or exponential (ex:` 27.15e2`, `−2e − 2`) format.

#### Booleans
The two boolean values are `true` and `false`.

#### Null-values
`null` and `undefined` represent both null-values.

#### Strings

> Text or strings must be noted between double quotes, where the special characters are escaped using a backslash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Text or strings must be written between double quotes, where the special characters are escaped using a backslash.
```

> In the table below is there an overview of these special characters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The table below is an overview of these special characters.
```

| Description | Escape sequence |
| ------------ | ---------------- |
| Backslash | `\\` |
| Single quote | `\'` |
| Double quote | `\"` |
| ASCII Bell | `\a` |
| ASCII Backspace | `\b` |
| ASCII Formfeed | `\f` |
| ASCII Linefeed | `\n` |
| ASCII Carriage Return | `\r` |
| ASCII Horizontal tab | `\t` |
| ASCII Vertical tab | `\v` |
| Octal character value | `\ooo` |
| Hexadecimal character value | `\xhh` |
| 16-bit unicode character value | `\uhhhh` |
| 32-bit unicode character value | `\Uhhhhhhhh` |
| Named unicode character | `\N{name}` |

#### Collections
There are multiple data collections in TESTed: sequence, sets, tuples and dictionaires.

> When you use collections in expressions and statements can the values in these collection contain both values and expressions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you use collections in expressions and statements, the values in these collection can contain both values and expressions.
```

For the **return values** can these collections only contains values and **no expressions**.
In addition, the values in these collections can be heterogeneous (different data types).

##### Sequences
An ordered dynamic collection of values.
These are denoted with help of squared brackets and could be empty.
Some examples:
```javascript
[5, 7, 8]
[5, 7.5, true, "text", null]
[random()]
[]
```

##### Tuples
An ordered fixed collection of values.
These are denoted with help of round brackets and could be empty.
Some examples:
```javascript
(5, 7, 8)
(5, 7.5, [true, "text"], null)
(random())
()
```

##### Sets
An unordered dynamic collection of unique invariable values.

> These are denoted with help of accolades.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are denoted with help of curly brackets.
```

Empty sets must be notated in a specific way because the dictionaries als use curly brackets for notation.
Some examples:
```javascript
{5, 7, 8}
{5, 7.5, (true, "text")}
{random()}
```

::: warning Remark

> Not every programming language support each datatype as set element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not every programming language supports each datatype as set element.
```

::::

##### Dictionaries
An unordered dynamic collection of key-value pairs.

> Hereby must the keys be invariable, the values could be both invariable and variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The keys must be invariable, the values could be both invariable and variable.
```
Is "invariable" already explained somewhere?

Like the sets are dictionaries denoted with curly brackets, but dictionaries could be empty.
Both the keys and values can be of any datatype.
Some examples:
```javascript
{}
{"first": 5}
{"size": 5, "precision": 0.75, "rounding active": true}
{0: random(), get_id(): get_username()}
```

::: warning Remark

> Not every programming language support each datatype as key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not every programming language supports each datatype as key.
```

:::

#### Cast
Our grammar supports the ability to "cast" the values (not expressions) to a specific data type.
Casting is denoted with `<Value> :: <Datatype>`.
An empty set by examples kan be denoted with one of the following notations:
```haskell
[] :: set
() :: set
{} :: set
```

### Functions

> The arguments of a function call are notated within round brackets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The arguments of a function call are notated within parentheses.
```

A function call can be both be a global function, or an object function.
Some examples:
```javascript
add(5, 2)
object.get_name()
get_element(4, ["first", 2, 3.4])
```

### Constructor
Constructors are very similar to function calls, except that they are preceded with the keyword `new`.
Some examples:
```javascript
new Counter()
new object.Pair("Pair", 8.4e-5)
```

### Expression
By expressions we mean values, function calls, constructors and variables (and properties).

### Variable assignments

> If we want to use variables, we want to assign values to these variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we want to use variables, we need to assign values to these variables.
```

> For constructors and values can the datatype be derived and must not be specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For constructors and values, the datatype can be derived and must not be specified.
```

For function calls, however, the data type must be specified explicitly.
Some examples:
```javascript
Counter counter = new Counter()
pair = new object.Pair("Paar", 8.4e-5)
text value = get_value(0, pair)
number = 5 :: int8
```

> ## Known traps

Reviewer: I'm not sure about the name. Maybe "common problems" or "known pitfalls"?

### Keys

> Forgetting a colon after the keynames in the YAML-syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Forgetting a colon after the key names in YAML.
```

Example:

> Fault:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wrong:
```

(same for other examples)

```yaml
- tab "Feedback"
```

> Corrected:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Correct:
```
(same for other examples)

```yaml
- tab: "Feedback"
```

### Lists

> Forgetting hyphen and space by list elements.

Reviewer: Reword

Or using it to much, which leads to much more elements than expected.
Example:

Fault:
```yaml
- tab: "Feedback"
- contexts:
  - stdin: "input-0"
    stdout: "output-0"
    stdin: "input-1"
    stdout: "output-1"
```

Corrected:
```yaml
- tab: "Feedback"
  contexts:
  - stdin: "input-0"
    stdout: "output-0"
  - stdin: "input-1"
    stdout: "output-1"
```

### Text
There are multiple ways to denote strings in YAML.

> The different notations have different ways to handle whitespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The different notations handle whitespace in different ways.
```

::: tip Hint

> To avoid confusion we recommend using the double quotes' notation when you want to pass textual values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid confusion we recommend using the double quotes notation when you want to pass textual values.
```

> Whereby you can escape special characters, for example newlines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using this notation, you can escape special characters, for example newlines.
```

When you want to specify statements, expressions and raw return-values, we recommend to use single quotes, because it doesn't escape special characters.
:::

> Below you find an overview of all YAML strings notations, if you want to use another.

Reviewer: Also mention what is meant by "Translation JSON"

#### Single quotes
By the single quotes, no character will be escaped.

> Except for the single quote itself, that must be escaped by repeating the symbol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Except for the single quote itself, which must be escaped by repeating the symbol.
```

Example YAML:
```yaml
single: 'data''\ndata'
```

Translation JSON:
```json
{"single": "data'\\ndata"}
```

#### Double quotes

> By the double quotes, characters will be escaped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using double quotes, special characters need to be escaped.
```

Example YAML:
```yaml
double: "data\ndata"
```

Translate JSON:
```json
{"double": "data\ndata"}
```

#### Unquoted

> When you use unqouted strings, no character will be escaped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using unquoted strings, no character escaping is necessary.
```

Example YAML:
```yaml
unquoted: data \ data
```

Translation JSON:
```json
{"unquoted": "data \\ data"}
```

#### Multi-line unquoted

> By multi-line unquoted string, will a single newline character be replaced with a space and will the whitespace around a line be trimmed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using multi-line unquoted string, a single newline character will be replaced with a space and the whitespace around a line will be trimmed.
```

> A complet empty line by replaced with a newline character.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A completely empty line by replaced with a newline character.
```

Example YAML:
```yaml
multi unquoted:
  line1
    line2
  line3

  line4

  line5
```

Translation JSON:
```json
{"multi unquoted": "line1 line2 line3\nline4\n\nline5"}
```

#### Multi-line single quotes
This is very similar to the multi-line unquoted strings.
Example YAML:
```yaml
multi single quoted: 'line1''\nline1a
    line2
  line3

  line4

  line5'
```

Translation JSON:
```json
{"multi single quoted": "line1'\\nline1a line2 line3\nline4\n\nline5"}
```

#### Multi-line double quotes
This is very similar to multi-line unquoted strings, but special characters must be escaped.
Example YAML:
```yaml
multi double quoted: "line1\nline1a
    line2
  line3

  line4

  line5"
```

Translation JSON:
```json
{"multi double quoted": "line1\nline1a line2 line3\nline4\n\nline5"}
```

#### literal block

> YAML support multiple bloknotations, whereby newlines are kept.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
YAML supports multiple block notations, where newlines are kept.
```

> Hereby will the indentation, that deviates from the alignment not be trimmed away.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this mode, indentation that deviates from the alignment not be trimmed.
```

There will be also no escaping.

##### Default (`|`)
Removes each empty line at the end of the string, but keeps one newline character at the end.
Example YAML:
```yaml
literal: |
  line1a\nline1b
    line2
  # not a comment
  end

# end of statement
```

Translation JSON:
```json
{"literal": "line1a\\nline1b\n  line2\n# not a comment\nend\n"}
```

##### Keep (`|+`)
Keeps all newlines at the end of the string.
Example YAML:
```yaml
literal: |+
  line1a\nline1b
    line2
  # not a comment
  end

# end of statement
```

Translation JSON:
```json
{"literal": "line1a\\nline1b\n  line2\n# not a comment\nend\n\n"}
```

##### Trim (`|-`)

> Hereby will each newline at the end be removed and there will be no newline at the end of the string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here each newline at the end will be removed and there will be no newline at the end of the string.
```

Example YAML:
```yaml
literal: |-
  line1a\nline1b
    line2
  # not a comment
  end

# end of statement
```

Translation JSON:
```json
{"literal": "line1a\\nline1b\n  line2\n# not a comment\nend"}
```

#### Folded block

> YAML also support multiple block notations whereby newline are replaced by a space, when te next line the alignment respects.

Reviewer: Reword

Each empty line will be interpreted as a newline.

> Also will an alignment, that deviates not be trimmed away.

Reviewer: reword

Example YAML:
```yaml
literal: >
  line1a
  line1b
    line2

  line3

# end of statement
```

Translation JSON:
```json
{"literal": "line1a line1b\n  line2\n\nline3\n"}
```

##### Keep (`>+`)
Keeps all newlines at the end of the string.
Example YAML:
```yaml
literal: >+
  line1a
  line1b
    line2

  line3

# end of statement
```

Translation JSON:
```json
{"literal": "line1a line1b\n  line2\n\nline3\n\n"}
```

##### Trim (`>-`)
Removes each empty line at the end of the string and there will be no newline character at the end.
Example YAML:
```yaml
literal: >-
  line1a
  line1b
    line2

  line3

# end of statement
```

Translation JSON:
```json
{"literal": "line1a line1b\n  line2\n\nline3"}
```

### 'yes' and 'no'
`yes` and `no` are an extra notation for the booleans `true` and `false`.

### Translation to textual types
If no strings are used for `stdin`,` stdout` and `stderr`, but numbers and boolean values, the final textual data may deviate from what you intended.
Example:
```yaml
stdin: 077
```

Will be interpreted as an octal number: `7 ⋅ 8 + 7 = 63`.
```yaml
stdin: "63"
```

### Function name

> De style convention for function names in the DSL is `snake_case`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The convention for function names in the DSL is `snake_case`.
```

> When you deviate from this convention, it can't be guaranteed that the correct style convention for a specific programming languages could be followed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you deviate from this convention, it can't be guaranteed that the correct style convention for a specific programming languages will be used.
```

## Convert
To translate DSL-testplans to JSON-testplans for TESTed, a Python script can be used, which is part of TESTed.

> This script could be found on the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/dodona-edu/universal-judge) of TESTed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This script can be found on the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/dodona-edu/universal-judge) of TESTed.
```

> The script could be execute with one of the following commands (and combinations) in the root directory of the GitHub repository:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The script kan be execute with one of the following commands (and combinations) in the root directory of the GitHub repository:
```

```bash
# Standard input - standard output
$ python3 -m tested.translate_dsl < testplan.yaml > testplan.json
# Short options
$ python3 -m tested.translate_dsl -i testplan.yaml -o testplan.json
# Long option names
$ python3 -m tested.translate_dsl --dsl testplan.yaml --json testplan.json
# Positional arguments
$ python3 -m tested.translate_dsl testplan.yaml testplan.json
```

> 

Reviewer: Too many newlines

```yaml
namespace: "solution"
disable_optimizations: true
tabs:
- tab: "Hoe slim ben jij?"
  config:
    stdout:
      ignoreWhitespace: true
      tryFloatingPoint: true
  contexts:
  - stdin: "8809"
    stdout: "6"
  - config:
      stdout:
        caseInsensitive: false
    stdin: 7111
    stdout: 0
  - stdin: "2172"
    stdout:
      data: "0"
      config:
        applyRounding: true
        roundTo: 10
```

### Description

#### namespace
By default, TESTed will use `submission` as the namespace for an exercise.
How this namespace is used, depends on the programming language.
For example, in Java this must be the name of the class of the solution submitted by the students.
You might want to change this to something that makes sense for the exercise.
You should use `snake_case` for the submission. TESTed will automatically convert it to the conventions of each programming language. For example, the namespace `result_calculator` will require Java submissions to contain the class `ResultCalculator`.

#### disable_optimizations
By default, TESTed will use some optimization techniques to reduce the execution time.

> However, these optimization techniques could cause the optimized code to lead to unwanted results.

Author: I added some more detail for the unwanted results.

Therefore can the user disable these optimizations for the entire testplan, should this be necessary.

#### tabs
When you want to provide `namespace`, `disable_optimizations` or global configuration options, you must use the keyword `tabs` the pass the list of tabs.

#### Textual types
The second testcase in the testplan for __How smart are you?__, illustrates that not only strings can be used for standard input, output or error.
In this case they are integers but also logical values and floating decimal numbers are possible (the textual types).

::: warning Remark
To avoid problems, we recommend to use strings for standard input, output and error.
This is caused by the fact that the textual types will be converted to strings.
For more information about the translation of textual types, see paragraph [Known pitfalls](#known-pitfalls).
:::

#### Configuration
There are multiple configuration options to pass to the evaluator for standard output and error.
These options are:

> - **ignoreWhitespace**:

Author: Add issue https://github.com/dodona-edu/universal-judge/issues/198
